Collaborative Decision-making Processes for
Maintaining Biodiversity: Two Australian Case
Studies
C. Pettit a , D. Pullar b
a School of Mathematical and Geospatial Science, RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia
(Chris.pettit@rmit.edu.au)
b School of Geography, Planning and Architecture, University of Queensland, Australia
Abstract: There have been many models developed by scientists to assist decision-makers in making
socio-economic and environmental decisions. It is now recognised that there is a shift in the dominant
paradigm to making decisions with stakeholders, rather than making decisions for stakeholders. Our
paper investigates two case studies where group model building has been undertaken for maintaining
biodiversity in Australia. The first case study focuses on preservation and management of green spaces
and biodiversity in metropolitan Melbourne under the umbrella of the Melbourne 2030 planning
strategy. A geographical information system is used to collate a number of spatial datasets
encompassing a range of cultural and natural assets data layers including: existing open spaces,
waterways, threatened fauna and flora, ecological vegetation covers, registered cultural heritage sites,
and existing land parcel zoning. Group model building is incorporated into the study through eliciting
weightings and ratings of importance for each datasets from urban planners to formulate different
urban green system scenarios. The second case study focuses on modelling ecoregions from spatial
datasets for the state of Queensland. The modelling combines collaborative expert knowledge and a
vast amount of environmental data to build biogeographical classifications of regions. An information
elicitation process is used to capture expert knowledge of ecoregions as geographical descriptions, and
to transform this into prior probability distributions that characterise regions in terms of environmental
variables. This prior information is combined with measured data on the environmental variables
within a Bayesian modelling technique to produce the final classified regions. We describe how linked
views between descriptive information, mapping and statistical plots are used to decide upon
representative regions that satisfy a number of criteria for biodiversity and conservation. This paper
discusses the advantages and problems encountered when undertaking group model building. Future
research will extend the group model building approach to include interested individuals and
community groups.
Keywords: GIS; environmental planning; group model building.
1. INTRODUCTION
Traditionally, physical planners and
environmental modellers in isolation have
undertaken land use planning. However, this
resulted in outcomes not acceptable to
stakeholders and the wider community. Today
the dominant paradigm has moved towards
planning with the community rather than for
the community, as advocated by Forester
[1999]. This paper examines two Australian
case studies, which focus on land use planning
and biodiversity issues: i) in urban areas, and
ii) in a regional context.
The first case study analysis deploys both
geographical information system (GIS) and
planning support system (PSS) technologies in
developing green system scenarios. The What
if? PSS tool has been used to elicit decision
factors and their weightings of importance
from environmental planners within the City of
Darebin in order to run and re-run urban green
space scenario simulations.
The second case study involved running
workshops with a scientific panel to develop
an ecoregional classification for the state of
Queensland. Visual spatial exploration tools
were developed to enable data communication
and model exploration. The study aimed to
elicit map-based information from experts
(mainly ecologists and biologists) on prior
probabilities for the distribution of
environmental variables that characterized
bioregions within a Bayesian modelling
framework [Pullar et al., 2004].
This paper discusses the methodology used to
formulate the different scaled scenarios,
examines the results of urban biodiversity
scenarios (case study I) and ecoregional
classifications (case study II), and offers
directions of how approaches will be refined
through the incorporation of further feedback
from planners, experts, and the ultimately the
community.
2. METHODOLOGY
Miller et al. [1998] have developed a
collaborative approach for analysing green
systems in the urban context, which integrates
suitability analysis with GIS technology for
identifying suitable sites for greenway
development in the town of Prescott Valley,
Arizona, USA. However, there is a paucity of
research examining urban green spaces
systems in Australia. Our paper incorporates a
case study of work in progress, which focuses
on the development of a collaborative land
suitability approach for developing green
systems scenarios for the City of Darebin,
Melbourne.
2.1 Scenario Modelling
Spatial modelling is based upon the
formulation and evaluation of future scenarios.
In the context of decision support systems a
scenario can be defined as:
“A description of the current situation, of a
possible or desirable future state as well as of
the series of events that lead from the current
state of affairs to this future state.” [Veenklaas
and van den Berg, 1994, p99].
PSS are a specialised form of spatial decision
support systems (SDSS) focusing on planning
(predominantly land use) related decisions.
PSS have been described as geo-information
tools used to assist in public and private
planning processes (or parts thereof) across a
range of spatial scales and within a specific
planning context [Stillwell, 2003]. In
December 2003, the 4 th Place Matters -
workshop was held in San Francisco, USA.
(www.placematters.us). This workshop
focused principally on the application of four
collaborative PSS tools including:
1. What if?
2. CommunityViz
3. Index
4. Place3S
The workshop enabled participants to explore
the application of these PSSs in a charette
environment, (a charette is defined as a
collaborative hands-on learning experience), to
see how planners and community facilitators to
formulate different collaborative visions could
use them. Direct involvement by the
community in the early stages of plan
formulation through the interaction of
advanced spatial planning tools is an approach
which is now being widely applied in urban
planning [Synder, 2001].
In formulating the green system scenarios for
the City of Darebin case study the What if?
PSS developed by Klosterman [1999] was
used. What if? is a collaborative GIS based
PSS used to derive land suitability maps,
calculate future land use demand, and
formulate possible scenarios. In this research
only the suitability module of What if? was
used to formulate urban green system
scenarios.
2.2 Approaches to Group Decision
Modelling
There are many techniques for group decision
modelling, which integrate multiple criteria
decision-making and GIS based techniques
[Malczewski 1999; Jankowski and Nyerges
2001]. Some of these include the passive use
of technology where PSS operators observe
and model the results of scenarios created by
participants using non-technical media such as
paper maps and land use stickers. The passive
scenario modelling approach was
demonstrated at the PlaceMatters workshop
2003, where Place3S PSS software, was used
in a charette to formulate and evaluate
potential development scenarios for a fictitious
study area – Edge City, as illustrated in Figure
1.
Figure 1. Place3S passive group decision
modelling
Other approaches to group decision modelling
may be undertaken using more active
techniques, which allow the participants to
directly interact with PSS software. Such can
be the case with the What if? PSS, where
participants enter their weightings of
importance directly into the software and
visualise the scenario results immediately after
the geocomputational processing is completed.
The later, active technology approach is
utilised in both the case studies presented in
this paper.
Generally, the factor weighting and ratings
employed in active group decision models
need to be determined by informed decisionmakers
and stakeholders. These individuals
and groups may include environment planners
and managers from local and state
governments, community groups, and the
public using formal approaches such as
interview, public consultation, and discussions.
For example, in Pettit's [2003] land use
planning scenarios for Hervey Bay, the local
council planners were consulted to determine
the appropriate weighting and ratings. This
approach was applied in developing
preliminary urban green systems scenarios for
the City of Darebin. Similarly, when dealing
with scientific based decisions there is a need
for the input of knowledge by experts in
influencing the outcome of a classification. In
the ecoregion case study expert knowledge
from a panel is used to select model
parameters, adjust parameter distributions, and
assist in separating structural characteristics of
observed data from unstructured random
effects. This is explained in detail for the
ecoregional analysis in the next section.
3. A CASE STUDY APPROACH
3.1 Urban Biodiversity in the City of
Darebin
Green systems such as parks and waterways
are an important component of the urban
environment. Preserving and enhancing green
systems is critical not only for sustaining and
improving the quality of life of urban residents
but also for conserving biodiversity. In the
Metropolitan v 2030 Strategy, the importance
of sustainable green systems is expressed in
the vision for the city in 2030 in the form of
green wedges [DOI, 2002].
The city of Darebin is one of 31 Council
comprising metropolitan Melbourne
Geographically. Darebin is located between
Melbourne’s central business district (CBD)
and the City of Whittlesea growth area. The
City has diverse open space networks that are
facing pressure from urban development.
Certain areas with environmental and cultural
significance in the City of Darebin need to be
protected including: native grasslands,
waterways (such as Merri and Darebin
Creeks), and significant remnant vegetation
(such as river red gums at Mount Cooper).
Darebin has nearly 0.6 square metres of open
space per person, a level comparable to many
other inner Melbourne municipalities.
Before the urban green system scenarios were
formulated for the City of Darebin a
geodatabase was created. Datasets comprising
this database includes:
1. Green systems data – open spaces,
waterways and water areas;
2. Biodiversity data – flora, ecological
vegetation classes, threatened fauna;
3. Cultural heritage data – registered
heritage sites; and
4. Planning scheme and land parcel
(cadastral) data.
A number of buffering and union GIS
operations were performed on these data
layers. For example, to accommodate the
analysis of suitability of land use by protecting
the natural and cultural heritage, green
systems, biodiversity, and cultural heritage
areas were buffered into 5 zones (0-25, 25-50,
50-75, 75-100, >100 metres) to classify the
conservation importance of these areas in
sustainable land use. The resultant datasets
were used to construct the geodatabase for
importing into What if?.
A number of urban green systems scenarios
were developed to consider the principal of
sustainable built environment, and to analyse
and determine the supply of land (both
quantity and location) suitable for protecting
and enhancing the existing green system and
biodiversity. Land suitability analysis was
undertaken using a weighted linear
combination (WLC), multiple criteria analysis
(MCA) model, based on the sieve mapping
overlay technique [McHarg, 1969]. The MCA
model is a simple mathematical procedure
which multiplies each decision factor’s rating
by the overall weighting of importance
assigned by the user and then performs an
additive operation, combining all suitability
factors, to derive a final potential cost surface,
also known as a suitability map. By using this
simple MCA technique the underlying
mathematical model is easily understood by
most planners, decision-makers and ultimately
the community.
The decision factors have been formulated
from a number of spatial datasets listed above
using standardised factor values related to
buffer distances and weightings determined by
priorities in accordance to the existing Darebin
Council planning policies. In summary, the
land suitability analysis module in What if?
enabled multiple decision factors to be
synthesised in order to determine the relative
suitability of different locations for a particular
land use (‘open space’ in this study). Table 1
contains the weightings and rating assigned by
the City of Darebin environmental planners
used to formulate one of the sustainable urban
green system scenarios.
Category
Considered suitability factors and ratings
Open Water
Land
Factors Fauna Flora space features Heritage EVC Use
Factor weight 3 3 3 3 - - 2
0-25 5 5 3 5 - - Park 5
Buffers
(m)
25-50 5 4 3 4 - - bus 2
50-75 5 3 2 3 - - ind 2
75-100 5 2 2 2 - - infra 3
Outside 1 1 1 1 - - res 2
Table 1. Urban Green System Scenario
weightings and ratings.
These weightings and ratings, combined with
permissible land use conversion values, were
used to formulate the urban green space
scenario illustrated in Figure 2. This particular
scenario is based on a policy of preserving
open space, primarily for biodiversity
purposes, rather than cultural amenity.
Figure 2. Biodiversity Green System Scenario
for the City of Darebin.
3.2 Modelling Ecoregions in Queensland
Ecoregions define recognisable areas that
embody broad environmental and landscape
structures. Queensland, like most states in
Australia, has developed a hierarchical
classification of ecoregions for conservation
planning, natural resource management and
funding allocation. Because of their
significance in decision-making and legislation
it is essential that ecoregions be defined in an
objective and scientifically defensible manner.
This lead to a project between the state
Environmental Protection Agency and the
University of Queensland to develop a
ecosystem classification that combined expert
(qualitative) knowledge from ecologists and
(quantitative) data analysis of environmental
data. The resulting classification is described
in Pullar et al. [2004]. The main feature of this
classification is that qualitative forms of
knowledge are interpreted as quantitative data
in a rigorous statistical model. Forms of
knowledge include rules of thumb, expert
advice, scientific publications, or reports. The
Bayesian modelling approach supports the
inclusion of this knowledge as informative
priors, which is balanced with hard data in the
model result. The procedure of transforming
knowledge into probability statements for
informative priors in modelling is called
information elicitation. In this case study,
information elicitation is carried out through a
focused workshop that brings together
scientists to define ecoregions. The experts
often express their knowledge geographically
by describing regions that, in their opinion,
characterise a unique pattern of biotic and
landscape qualities. For instance, coastal
lowland regions with Melaleuca open forest.
Through information elicitation we obtain
geographical descriptions for ecoregions, and
analyse these locations with measurable
environmental data, such as climatic, terrain,
and soil data. The experts can interactively
explore and adjust environmental data
distributions and their confidence in these to
conform to their opinions of ecoregions. This
is transformed into probability distributions
and an overall weight is given for this prior
information. The Bayesian modelling
computes definitions for ecoregions producing
outputs as classified maps, uncertainty maps
and charts showing the posterior probability
distributions.
A GIS application has been written for
elicitation of ecoregion classifications. The
three main components of the system are: i) an
exploratory interface for users to select areas
that define ecoregions by querying locations
and attributes (biotic and landscape categorical
variables), ii) data visualisation tool that allows
users to adjust the abiotic variables used to
characterise these ecoregions, and iii) a
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
simulation algorithms that uses a Gibbs
sampling technique [Gilks et al., 1996] to
classify ecoregions as density mixture
distributions. Figure 3 shows an example of an
interface for the data visualisation tool. Experts
can adjust class breaks of data distribution for
several variables to define a model-based
cluster corresponding to an ecoregion.
Figure 3. Data visualisation of environmental
(abiotic) variables from geographical selection.
4. ADVANTAGES & WEAKNESSES
The land suitability analysis approach to urban
green systems scenario modelling has many
advantages. It is objective and effective;
decision factors can be clearly defined and
adjusted according to the objectives. It is
transparent as it enables planners, decisionmakers
and ultimately community members to
formulate scenarios by allowing participants to
select effective decision factors, assign various
weightings of importance to different decision
factors, and examine the results by spatial
demonstration (suitability maps and reports).
Weightings and ratings can easily be adjusted
to re-run scenarios based on different policy
emphasise.
This type of modelling approach can help to
optimise the allocation of additional land to
enhance existing green systems in built-up
areas such as in the City of Darebin. However,
one of the weaknesses of the model is the
constraint imposed by jurisdictional
boundaries. This means that the formulation of
an integrated urban green system is restricted,
which negatively impacts on the effectiveness
of biodiversity corridors, a critical issue in
urban environmental management. For
example, Darebin and Merri Creeks flow
through three councils – Darebin, Moreland
and Banyule. For biodiversity protection of
such riparian habitats cross-jurisdictional land
use management practices need to be put in
place.
Another weakness in the urban green systems
scenario modelling approach is it considers the
future land use suitability only from the
perspective of biodiversity conservation and
green systems enhancement. However, in
reality many other complex issues need to be
considered including social and economic
dimensions pertaining to surrounding land uses
and values.
The advantages and weaknesses in the
ecoregional classification approach are
discussed in Pullar et al. [2004]. In this case
the output of expert collaboration is to produce
a regionalisation that is used as a framework
for environmental decision-making.
Differences of opinion can arise because
certain types of species are seen as endemic to
an area, or experts believe an ecological
community needs to be identified within a
region to remain intact. If there are conflicts in
opinion these can be broken down by
geographical descriptions to pinpoint where
the differences lie. It is generally agreed that
this does provide a better way for informing
the decision-making process, and the resulting
classifications are considered more defensible
from an ecological and legal standpoint.
5. FUTURE WORK
In this study, the factor weightings and ratings
are only considered from environmental
planners from the City of Darebin. However,
there is a need to involve stakeholders, and
community groups in the selection of model
inputs, factor weightings and ratings. This will
be explored in future studies.
Further work is required in improving the
usability of collaborative PSS systems such as
What if?. For example work is currently being
undertaken to improve the weighting and
rating capability of the suitability module
through the incorporation of slider bars to
enable users to set decision factor trade-offs, as
illustrated in Figure 4.
Figure 4. Future enhancements to What if? -
slider bar decision factor settings.
6. CONCLUSIONS
One of the current research foci of scenario
modelling has been the integration of maps
with multiple criteria decision models.
Progress in this area has been slow due to a
limited role played by maps as decision
support tools [Jankowski et al., 2001]. This
research examines the application of two
modelling approaches, which endeavour to
integrate mapping with multiple criteria
decision-making techniques.
The urban green systems scenario modelling
for the City of Darebin is an example of how
GIS and PSS technology can be used to
collaboratively preserve and enhance
biodiversity in urban areas. Using a
collaborative scenario modelling approach,
decisions on sustainable land use can be made
by potentially incorporating the opinions of
different experts, decision-makers, and
ultimately the wider community.
It is anticipated that a refined scenario
modelling approach will eventually be widely
used by planners, decision-makers and the
community to assist in achieving the
Melbourne 2030 vision. Such a modelling
approach could help local councils comprising
metropolitan Melbourne to implement an
integrated green systems strategy for
preserving and enhancing urban biodiversity
and conservation.
The ecoregion classification demonstrates a
different approach to modelling. The aim is to
produce an ecoregion classification based upon
environmental data. However, much of the
knowledge about ecoregions cannot be readily
expressed quantitatively. The case study
demonstrates that expert knowledge can be
expressed as geographical descriptions, which
are transformed into probability measures used
in a rigorous statistical model. The use of a
Bayesian modelling approach highlights the
possibility of combining qualitative and
quantitative information to produce model
results that include uncertainty values.
7. REFERENCES
DOI., Melbourne 2030: Planning for
Sustainable Growth. Melbourne,
Victorian Department of Infrastructure,
202pp.,Melbourne, 2002.
Forester, J., The deliberative practitioner:
encouraging participatory planning
processes, MIT Press, 321pp.,
Cambridge, Mass, 1999.
Gilks, W. R., S., D.J. Richardson and D. J.
Spiegelhalter, Markov Chain Monte
Carlo in Practice, Chapman & Hall,
512pp., London, 1996.
Jankowski, P., N. Andrienko and G.
Andrienko, Map-centred exploratory
approach to multiple criteria spatial
decision-making, International Journal
of Geographical Information Science
15(2), 101-127, 2001.
Jankowski, P. and T. Nyerges, Geographical
Information Systems for Group
Decision Making, Taylor & Francis,
240pp., London, 2001.
Klosterman, R. E., The What if? Collaborative
planning support system, Environment
and Planning B: Planning and Design,
26, 393-408, 1999.
Malczewski, J., GIS and Multicriteria
Decision Analysis, John Wiley & Sons,
392pp., Brisbane, 1999.
McHarg, I. L., Design with Nature, Doubleday
Natural History Press, 208pp., New
York, 1969.
Miller, W., W. M. G. Collins, F. R. Steiner and
E. Cook, An approach for greenway
suitability analysis, Landscape and
Urban Planning, 42, 91-105, 1998.
Pettit, C., Formulating a Sustainable
Development Land Use Strategy for
Hervey Bay 2021, paper presented at
the 8th International Conference on
Computers in Urban Planning and
Urban Management, CUPUM, Sendai,
Japan, May 27-29, 2003.
Pullar, D., S. Low Choy and W. Rochester,
Ecoregion Classification using a
Bayesian Approach and Centre-focused
Clusters, paper presented at the 2nd
International Environmental Modelling
and Software Society Conference,
IEMSS University of Osnabruck,
Germany, June14-17, 2004.
Stillwell, J., Planning Support Systems in
Practice, paper presented at the 8th
Conference on Computers in Urban
Planning and Urban Management,
CUPUM, Sendai, Japan, May 27-29,
2003.
Synder, K., Tools for Community Design and
Decision-making, in Planning Support
Systems in Practice, S. Geertman and J.
Stillwell (eds.), Springer, 99-120,
Berlin, 2001.
Veenklaas, F. R. and L. M. van den Berg,
Scenario building: art, craft or just a
fashionable whim?, paper presented at
the Symposium Scenario Studies for the
Rural Environment, Kluwer Academic
Publishing, Wageningen, Netherlands,
September 12-15, 1994.
