406 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 6, JUNE 2004
Local Stability of a New Adaptive Queue
Management (AQM) Scheme
Li Zhu, Student Member, IEEE, and Nirwan Ansari, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—In this letter, we propose a new Adaptive Queue Management
scheme based on the virtual queue size and the aggregate
flow rate. Our proposal is tailored for the widely deployed TCP
Reno and does not require modifications to TCP end users. We
prove that our scheme can guarantee local stability for a network
with an arbitrary topology and heterogeneous round-trip times for
TCP users.
Index Terms—Adaptive Queue Management (AQM), stability,
TCP, virtual queue.
I. INTRODUCTION
ACTIVE Queue Management (AQM) has been a very active
research area in recent years. Many AQM mechanisms
have been proposed, e.g., random early detection (RED)
[1], random exponential marking (REM) [2], PI controller [3],
adaptive virtual queue (AVQ) [4], and state feedback control
(SFC) [5]. AQM schemes control the traffic rate and buffer occupancy
by schematically dropping packets. If Explicit Congestion
Control (ECN) is enabled, packets are marked instead of
being dropped. Without loss of generality, we assume ECN is
enabled in this letter. End TCP users adapt their transmission
rates based on the marking feedback from AQM.
RED is a queue length based AQM that marks packets with
probability proportional to the current average queue length.
AVQ is a typical rate based scheme. REM, PI, and SFC use the
queue length and the aggregate flow rate to compute the marking
probability.
The TCP/AQM system has been modeled as a close loop control
system. One of the major concerns about such a system is its
stability property. [3]–[5] studied the local stability conditions
for the network with PI, AVQ, and SFC, respectively. These
works only considered a network of a single bottleneck link
with homogeneous round-trip times, and neglected the backward
propagation delays. [6] took the heterogeneous round-trip
time and backward propagation delay into consideration, and
provided the local stability condition for RED in a network with
a single bottleneck link.
In this letter, we propose a virtual queue and rate based AQM
scheme (referred to as VQR), which uses the virtual queue size
Manuscript received November 3, 2003. The associate editor cordinating the
review of this letter and approving it for publication was Prof. D. Petr. This work
has been supported in part by the New Jersey Commission on Higher Education
under the NJI-TOWER project, and by the New Jersey Commission on Science
and Technology under NJWINS.
The authors are with the Advanced Networking Laboratory, Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, New Jersey Institute of Technology,
Newark, NJ07102 USA (e-mail: lz6@njit.edu; nirwan.ansari@njit.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2004.831335
1089-7798/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE
and the aggregate flow rate to compute the marking probability.
We provide and prove the local stability condition of our scheme
for a network with an arbitrary topology rather than a single
bottleneck link, with heterogeneous rather than homogeneous
round-trip times, and with the consideration of rather than negligence
of the backward propagation delays.
The remainder of this letter is organized as follows. Section II
presents the framework of the TCP/AQM dynamic model.
Section III presents our proposed VQR scheme and the corresponding
local stability condition. Section IV presents the
conclusions.
II. TCP/AQM DYNAMICS
In this section, we adopt the work in [6] to present the
TCP/AQM dynamic model used in this letter. Consider a
network with links, each with capacity .
Assume there exist TCP sources, which share the links.
The routing policy is expressed by an matrix with
elements defined as
if source uses link
otherwise.
(1)
Each link marks packets with probability at time . Each
TCP source is associated with a round-trip time
where is the round-trip propagation delay for source and
is the queue length of link at time . The round-trip time
delay can also be expressed as
where is the forward delay from source to link and
is the backward delay from link back to source .
The transmitting rate of source , , is modeled as
where is the window size of . The aggregate transmission
rate at link is
With the assumption that is small, the end-to-end marking
probability for source can be obtained by summing up
the marking probability at each link traversed by
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
ZHU AND ANSARI: LOCAL STABILITY OF A NEW AQM SCHEME 407
We adopt the fluid TCP model studied in [3] and [6], in which
the TCP Reno window size evolves according to
(7)
The first term on the right side of (7) describes the additive
window increment, and the second term stands for the multiplicative
window decrement. The sending rate of TCP evolves
according to
The dynamics of the queue length at link can be expressed
as
Denote , , as the equilibrium values of , ,
, respectively. At equilibrium, we have , and
. Here, is the equilibrium
round-trip time for source . It can be shown from (7) that
(8)
(9)
(10)
Let , ,
. Linearizing (7), (8), and (5) around the equilibrium
state with the first-order approximation, we have
III. THE VQR ALGORITHM
(11)
(12)
(13)
VQR maintains a virtual queue , which is updated at
each packet arrival according to
(14)
where is a positive number less than but close to 1 (e.g., 0.95).
The marking probability is updated by
(15)
where is a reference virtual queue length, and and are
positive numbers. If , it is set to zero; if ,it
is set to one.
At the equilibrium state, we have . Thus, the aggregate
rate is , which is slightly smaller than the link capacity
. Although this could lead to slight link under-utilization,
there are some benefits of doing so. First, the queuing delay
is zero at the equilibrium state. Second, since we only consider
small perturbation around the equilibrium state, it can reasonably
be assumed that is always less than the link capacity.
As a result, the queue length is always zero, the round-trip
time is reduced to , and is always zero under such
an assumption. Thus, the second term on the right side of (12)
is negligible. Together with (11), we can rewrite (12) as
(16)
Linearizing (14) and (15) around the equilibrium state, we
have
(17)
(18)
Following [6], we can express (13), and (16)–(18) in the Laplace
domain in the matrix form:
where , ,
, , and
if source uses link
otherwise
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
if source uses link
(23)
otherwise.
Equations (19)–(21) form a closed-loop control system with the
return ratio
(24)
According to [6] and [7], the above control system is stable if the
eigenvalues of do not encircle in the complex
plane. Define
Using the relationship
(25)
(26)
and following the similar argument in [7], the eigenvalues of
are the same as those of:
(27)
Denote as the set of eigenvalues of . According to [7],
we have
(28)
408 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 6, JUNE 2004
where denotes the convex hull of the
set points . The spectral radius of
satisfies [7]:
(29)
where is the maximum number of links a TCP source traverses
in the network.
Denote
(30)
If do not encircle in the complex
plane, does not either [7]. Therefore, the system is stable.
Next, we present a sufficient condition to guarantee the stability
of such a system.
Theorem 1: If
and , the
system is stable.
Proof: From (30), we can rewrite as
(31)
With (10), it can be shown that the two conditions in Theorem 1
are equivalent to
Let
where
(32)
(33)
(34)
If ,wehave
and . Let be any frequencies at which
cross the negative real axis, and we have
Thus, from (34) and (35) we have
From (35) and with the properties of and ,wehave
If , from (36) we have
(35)
(36)
(37)
(38)
In other words, only cross the real axis on the right side
of point , and thus never encircle in the complex plane.
Therefore, the system is stable.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
In this letter, we have proposed VQR, a new AQM scheme
based on the virtual queue length and the aggregate flow rate.
VQR can achieve high link utilization and near zero queuing
delay. We have also presented and proved the local stability
condition for a TCP/VQR based network with an arbitrary
topology, heterogeneous round-trip times, and backward
propagation delays.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Floyd and V. Jacobson, “Random early detection gateways for congestion
avoidance,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Networking, vol. 1, no. 4, pp.
397–413, Aug. 1993.
[2] S. Athuraliya, S. H. Low, V. H. Li, and Q. Yin, “REM: Active queue management,”
IEEE Network Magazine, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 48–53, May/June
2001.
[3] C. Hollot, V. Misra, D. Towsley, and W. Gong, “On designing improved
controllers for AQM routers supporting TCP flows,” in Proc. IEEE IN-
FOCOM 2001, vol. 3, AK, Apr. 2001, pp. 1726–1734.
[4] S. Kunniyur and R. Srikant, “Analysis and design of an active virtual
queue (AVQ) algorithm for active queue management,” in Proc. ACM
SIGCOMM 2001, San Diego, CA, Aug. 2001, pp. 123–134.
[5] Y. Gao and J. C. Hou, “A state feedback control approach to stabilizing
queues for ECN-enabled TCP connections,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM
2003, vol. 3, San Diego, CA, Apr. 2003, pp. 2301–2311.
[6] S. H. Low, F. Paganini, J. Wang, and J. C. Doyle, “Linear stability of
TCP/RED and a scalable control,” Computer Networks J., vol. 43, no.
5, pp. 633–647, Dec. 2003.
[7] G. Vinnicombe, “On the scalability of end-to-end congestion control
for the Internet,” Cambridge Univ., Cambridge, U.K., CUED/F-IN-
FENG/TR.398, 2000.
